--- PAGE 1 ---
Deep learning-based surrogate model for 3-D patient-speciﬁc
computational ﬂuid dynamics
Pan Dua, Xiaozhi Zhu b, Jian-Xun Wanga,∗
aAerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
bApplied and Computational Mathematics and Statistics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN
Abstract
Optimization and uncertainty quantiﬁcation have been playing an increasingly important role
in computational hemodynamics. However, existing methods based on principled modeling
and classic numerical techniques have faced signiﬁcant challenges, particularly when it comes
to complex 3D patient-speciﬁc shapes in the real world. First, it is notoriously challenging
to parameterize the input space of arbitrarily complex 3-D geometries. Second, the process
often involves massive forward simulations, which are extremely computationally demanding
or even infeasible. We propose a novel deep learning surrogate modeling solution to address
these challenges and enable rapid hemodynamic predictions. Speciﬁcally, a statistical gen-
erative model for 3-D patient-speciﬁc shapes is developed based on a small set of baseline
patient-speciﬁc geometries. An unsupervised shape correspondence solution is used to en-
able geometric morphing and scalable shape synthesis statistically. Moreover, a simulation
routine is developed for automatic data generation by automatic meshing, boundary setting,
simulation, and post-processing. An eﬃcient supervised learning solution is proposed to map
the geometric inputs to the hemodynamics predictions in latent spaces. Numerical studies
on aortic ﬂows are conducted to demonstrate the eﬀectiveness and merit of the proposed
techniques.
Keywords: hemodynamics, machine learning, CFD, neural networks, cardiovascular
biomechanics
∗Corresponding author. Tel: +1 574-631-5302
Email address: jwang33@nd.edu (Jian-Xun Wang)
Preprint submitted to Journal of The Royal Society Interface April 20, 2022
arXiv:2204.08939v1  [physics.med-ph]  11 Apr 2022
--- PAGE 2 ---
1. Introduction
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains the ﬁrst leading cause of death and morbidity in
the U.S., posing a major healthcare concern [1]. Although medical imaging techniques, e.g.,
computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), have enabled the ac-
quisition of exquisite anatomical information and revolutionized cardiovascular medicine [2],
they are usually not able to provide hemodynamic information (e.g., ﬂow ﬁeld, pressure
losses) on their own, which is believed to be more important to CVD diagnosis and progno-
sis [3]. Computational models based on physical principles of cardiovascular systems, com-
bined with medical imaging, enable the derivation of functional information inaccessible by
medical images alone. In the past decade, image-based computational modeling has become
a paradigm in cardiovascular research [4–6] and is pioneering new clinical applications [7–9].
However, the ﬁrst-principle physics-based models are often computationally expensive since
they involve solving a large-scale discrete partial diﬀerential equation (PDE) system using nu-
merical techniques, e.g., ﬁnite volume or ﬁnite element methods (FVM/FEM). Particularly,
when studying dynamics of blood ﬂows (i.e., hemodynamics), computational ﬂuid dynamics
(CFD) or/and ﬂuid-structure interaction (FSI) models are needed, which are enormously
time-consuming (requiring supercomputing clusters) and prone to numerical challenges (re-
quiring signiﬁcant domain expertise). These roadblocks have primarily limited image-based
CFD modeling in clinical applications that require timely feedback for further therapeu-
tic assessment and treatment planning. For example, in the case of Heartﬂow (a medical
company for precision heart care), image data must be sent outside the hospital to be pro-
cessed by in-house supercomputers and results sent back to the hospital. Likewise, the high
computational cost prohibits many-query simulations for, e.g., uncertainty quantiﬁcation,
parameter estimation, design optimization, etc., which are becoming increasingly vital in
advancing the utility of cardiovascular modeling to practical applications [10–15].
As a more eﬃcient alternative to the principled CFD/FSI models, reduced-order modeling
(ROM) has been an area of intense investigation for years. One class of ROM is constructed
by simplifying the physics of cardiovascular systems, such as lumped parameter (LP) mod-
2
--- PAGE 3 ---
els, one-dimensional (1-D) models, or hybrid 3-D/1-D/LP models [16–18], where the physical
dimensions are reduced to diﬀerent levels. For example, LP models typically treat the hemo-
dynamic system as an electric circuit, where the relations among pressure drop, viscous
eﬀects, and ﬂow velocity are modeled as simpliﬁed ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs).
Although LP/1D models are very cheap, they only can predict global information (integral
quantities) instead of local ones (e.g., spatiotemporal ﬁelds of velocity or wall shear stresses),
while the latter is more useful to advance cardiovascular research/healthcare. To preserve
detailed hemodynamics information, the other class of ROM is built by projecting the full-
order governing PDEs (e.g., Navier-Stokes equations) onto a reduced subspace spanned by a
group of basis functions, such as proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) modes, known as
POD-Galerkin projection, which has been developed for facilitating hemodynamics analysis
in many 3-D patient-speciﬁc conﬁgurations [19–22]. However, the projection-based ROM
is often less stable in parametric settings and highly code-intrusive, posing great challenges
to leveraging legacy CFD/FSI solvers [23–25]. With the increasing data availability and
recent advances in machine learning (ML), there has been growing interest in developing
non-intrusive data-driven approaches for surrogate modeling of cardiovascular systems. In
general, data-driven surrogate models aim to learn the mapping between modeling inputs
(e.g., geometry, inlet/outlet, material properties, etc.) and computed outputs (e.g., re-
solved ﬂow ﬁeld, pressure contour, wall shear stress distribution, etc.) based on full-ﬁdelity
CFD/FSI simulation data. A well-trained surrogate model can predict detailed hemody-
namics information rapidly, supporting real-time or many-query applications. For example,
collocation-based polynomial chaos expansion (PCE) has been used to build non-intrusive
surrogates of 3-D blood ﬂow simulations for UQ tasks [10, 11]. Gao et al. [14, 15] developed
a bi-ﬁdelity surrogate model that leverages the eﬃciency and accuracy of the low- and high-
ﬁdelity CFD simulations, respectively. Deep neural network (DNN) has become a popular
surrogate modeling approach, renowned for their universal functional approximation capa-
bility for high-dimensional system [26, 27]. Most recently, DNN-based surrogate models have
been developed for cardiovascular applications and shown great potential [28–35].
3
--- PAGE 4 ---
However, ML-based surrogate modeling for complex patient-speciﬁc hemodynamics still
faces signiﬁcant challenges that existing techniques struggle to address simultaneously. First,
the parameterization of the geometric space spanned by irregular 3-D patient-speciﬁc shapes
is very challenging. As a result, most existing ML-based surrogate hemodynamic models
focus on inlet/outlet parameterization or studying idealized geometries, which can be easily
parameterized with a few descriptors (e.g., radius), and only a few studies dealt with 3-D
patient-speciﬁc cases [34, 35]. Second, a well-performed ML surrogate model often requires
a large number of training samples. However, patient-speciﬁc geometries are commonly
obtained by segmentation from medical images (e.g., CT and MRA), which are often cum-
bersome and time-consuming, leading to a prohibitive cost for data generation. To address
the issue, it is necessary to eﬀectively synthesize numerous new samples from a small set of
patient-speciﬁc geometries obtained by image segmentation.
In this paper, we try to ﬁll the gaps and develop an ML-based surrogate modeling frame-
work for rapid predictions of comprehensive hemodynamics information in 3-D patient-
speciﬁc aortic geometries. In contrast to many ML-based surrogates that predict global
hemodynamics information such as pressure loss, FFR, and mean wall shear stress (WSS),
this work focuses on predicting local blood ﬂow information (e.g., velocity, pressure, and
WSS ﬁelds), given irregular 3-D patient-speciﬁc shapes. The contributions of the current
paper are summarized as follows. First, we developed a method to parameterize 3-D patient-
speciﬁc aorta geometries based on stochastic shape modeling (SSM). Second, a generative
model is proposed to synthesize a massive amount of 3-D geometries from a small patient-
speciﬁc dataset. Third, an automatic simulation data generation routine is built, enabling
automatic meshing, prescribing boundary conditions, solving, and post-processing. Lastly,
an eﬃcient ML-based surrogate is developed by learning the functional map from geometries
to hemodynamics in latent spaces, and the performance of using DNN and bi-ﬁdelity tech-
nique is compared. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The proposed framework
is introduced in Section 2. Numerical results of the surrogate modeling are presented and
discussed in Section 3, and Section 4 concludes the paper.
4
--- PAGE 5 ---
2. Methodology
The pipeline of the proposed ML-based surrogate modeling framework is summarized by
Figure 1: (i) a small set of 3-D aorta geometries are reconstructed from anatomical images
Figure 1: The schematic of the proposed ML-based surrogate modeling of patient-speciﬁc
aortic ﬂows, with several components, including dataset generation (green box), network
training (orange box), and DNN inference/prediction (blue box).
acquired via CTA/MRI scans on real patients; (ii) the geometric space spanned by the
group of real patient-speciﬁc geometries is parameterized based on statistical shape modeling
(SSM), where the variation of aorta surfaces can be described mathematically; (iii) a large
number of virtual 3-D aorta shapes are synthesized within the latent geometric space; (iv)
a python-based simulation routine is developed for automating meshing, equation solving,
and post-processing of aortic CFD simulations on the generated ensemble of 3-D synthetic
shapes, and a large dataset of hemodynamics (e.g., pressure, velocity, and WSS ﬁelds) are
obtained; (v) The 3-D vascular shape and hemodynamic ﬁelds of interest (FOI) of each aorta
sample are encoded into latent spaces using Principal component analysis (PCA) or proper
5
--- PAGE 6 ---
orthogonal decomposition (POD), and then a deep neural network (DNN) is constructed
to learn the non-linear mapping within the latent space. Once the network is suﬃciently
trained, the ML surrogate model will be able to predict the fully resolved 3-D hemodynamic
ﬂow information within a split second, given a new aorta shape.
2.1. Patient-speciﬁc aorta geometry parameterization
2.1.1. Aorta dataset pre-processing
Eight 3-D aorta geometries are reconstructed from MRI scans of patients with Coarcta-
tion of the aorta (COA) conditions by the German Heart Institute Berlin [36]. Prior to the
parameterization of the variation of aorta shapes, one crucial step is to build correspondence
among them, which is very challenging since the deformation across diﬀerent patients is non-
isometric, especially aortas with a complex topological structure (e.g. many branches). To
reduce complexity, this work is focused on 3D aortic geometries with homeomorphisum. In
particular, several branches of the original thoracic aorta geometries, including left subcla-
vian artery (LSA), left carotid artery (LCA), right subclavian artery (RSA) and right carotid
artery (RCA), are trimmed oﬀ, simplifying their structure to a single channel. Later, a point
cloud of 4000 vertices is sampled from each aorta using voronoi clustering implemented via
the pyacvd module in python, which is loosely based on Approximated Centroidal Voronoi
Diagrams (ACVD) [37]. To regularize the position and the orientation of the aorta samples
in the 3-D Cartesian coordinate system, rigid iterative closest points (ICP) algorithm [38] is
adopted to align every aorta geometry to a template selected from the aorta dataset.
2.1.2. Statistical shape modeling and virtual aorta synthesis
With the aligned real aorta geometries, we establish an SSM framework to parameterize
the complex 3-D patient-speciﬁc geometric input space and synthesize enormous virtual aorta
geometries. The procedure is conducted in three phases: (1) building correspondence; (2)
projection to latent space; (3) synthesizing virtual aortas.
Building correspondence. Let{Ai}i=1,...,n denote the set of n original patient-speciﬁc
aorta shapes, and each shape sample Ai∈ R3×p is represented by a point cloud of surfaces
6
--- PAGE 7 ---
vertices Ai ={ai
j}p
j=1, where p is the total number of vertices. Given a template geome-
try AS∈{ Ai}i=1,...,n selected from the set {Ai}i=1,...,n, we aim to build correspondence by
deforming the template AS to all the other aorta shapes AT∈{ Ai}i̸=s, which are referred
to as source geometry and target geometries, respectively. The diﬀeomprphism function
AT = Φ(AS) : R3×p→ R3×p, describing the deformation from the template AS to each of the
rest aorta samples{Ai}i̸=S, can be solved based on the controlled-point-based large deforma-
tion diﬀeomorphic metric mapping (LDDMM) algorithm [39]. In LDDMM, the deformation
is described as a “current” of surface, which is the ﬂux of a 3-D “velocity” vector ﬁeld over
the template{aS
i}p
i=1,
v(ai) =
r∑
j=1
K(ai, qj)·µj, (1)
where{qj}r
1 and{µk}r
1 represent a set ofr “control” points and corresponding “momentum”
vectors, which are deﬁned on the source geometry As; K is a Gaussian kernel K(a, q) =
exp(−||a−q||L2/σ2) withσ controlling the typical width of the deformation. The deformation
is performed along the pseudo time axis τ, and the deformed point cloud locations at τ are
denoted by As(τ), where As(t = 0) represents the initial state (i.e., the point cloud {as
j}p
j=1
of template As). The point deformations are governed by the following ODEs,
˙As(τ) = v
(
As(τ),τ
)
, (2)
which can be solved using the second-order Runge-Kutta method, and meanwhile the control
points and momentum vectors are updated based on the Hamiltonian dynamics,



˙q(τ) = K
(
q(τ), q(τ)
)
µ(τ),
˙µ(τ) =−1
2∇qK
(
q(τ), q(τ)
)
µ(τ)⊤µ,
(3a)
(3b)
where K represents the kernel matrix and
(
K(q(τ), q(τ))
)
i,j = K(qi(τ), qj(τ)). We force
the deformed template ˜AS
τ e at the ﬁnal step (i.e., τ = τe) to match the target geometry
AT using the steepest gradient descent optimization algorithm. To deﬁne the loss function,
a “distance” metric, evaluating the diﬀerence between the deformed template ˜AS
τ e and the
target geometryAT , is required. As the aorta geometries are composed of triangular meshes
7
--- PAGE 8 ---
with grid centers{ci}m
i=1 and edge normal vectors {ni}m
i=1, the varifold distance metric d is
deﬁned as,
d
({
(nS
i, cS
i )
}mS
i=1
,
{
(nT
j, cT
j )
}mT
j=1
)
=
mS
∑
i
mT
∑
j
K(cS
i, cT
j )·
(
(nS
i )⊤· nT
j
)2
||nS
i||·|| nT
j|| . (4)
The metric is calculable regardless of whether point-to-point correspondence exists between
two geometries. Namely, the total amount of grids mS andmT for source and target geome-
tries can be diﬀerent. Once the diﬀeomorphism functions are solved, all target geometries can
be approximated by the deformations from the template, establishing a correspondence for
the original shape dataset. The LDDMM algorithm has been implemented in Deformetrica,
an open-source software designed for statistical analysis of meshes [40].
Projection to latent space. To enable a concise parameterization of the input geomet-
ric space, PCA is applied to encode the 3-D irregular shape onto the latent space. Speciﬁcally,
{(xi
j,yi
j,zi
j)}j=1,..,p, denoting the Cartesian coordinates of the point cloud on the aorta sample
˜Ai, was ﬂattened into a vector ˜VVV
i
= (xi
1,yi
1,zi
1,...,x i
p,yi
p,zi
p). The entire 3-D shape dataset
can be squeezed into a matrix AAA = ( ˜VVV
⊤
1,..., ˜VVV
⊤
N)⊤. Subsequently, PCA acting on A yields
the eigenvectors{WWWi}i=1,...,z and eigenvalues{λi}i=1,...,z, where z is the truncation integer
controlling the number of primary components needed. Each aorta shape can be decomposed
as follow,
˜AAAi≈AAAmean +
z∑
j=1
αi
j
√
λjWWWj, (5)
where the coeﬃcient vector αααi = (αi
1,...,α i
z) represents the encoded shape, which, in other
words, is the projection of sample Ai in the latent space. Let F and F−1 denote the PCA
operator and its inverse, respectively. The reconstruction error Epca is deﬁned to evaluate
the accuracy of the PCA transform,
Epca =||F−1(F (AAA))−AAA||L2
||AAA||L2
. (6)
Synthesizing virtual aorta geometries. Motivated by the need of suﬃcient training
samples for data-driven ML surrogate modeling, we propose a shape synthesizing method for
producing a large amount of synthetic 3-D aortas from a small set of original aorta shapes.
8
--- PAGE 9 ---
The general idea is to sample from the latent geometric space spanned by the original aorta
shapes and then synthesize new aortas by decoding the sampled latent shape vectors back to
the Cartesian space, as illustrated in Figure 2, where the geometric space is spanned by three
original aorta shapes. To synthesize new geometries within the geometric space, we propose
Figure 2: Illustration of latent space distribution and visualization of generated synthetic
aortas ( ) from 3 original aorta shapes ( ), where PC1 and PC2 represent the ﬁrst and
second primary components of the latent geometric space, respectively.
two diﬀerent methods: (1) random linear interpolation and (2) uniform PCA sampling. The
random linear interpolation approach linearly combines the n original samples in the latent
space with randomly assigned weights to generate new samples AAA∗,
AAA∗ =F−1(
n∑
i=1
ωiαiαiαi) =AAAmean +
n∑
i=1
z∑
j=1
ωiαi
j
√
λjWWWj, (7)
where ωωω = [ω1,··· ,ωn]T is a randomly generated weight vector that satisﬁes ∑z
i=1ωi = 1.
As an alternative, uniform PCA sampling approach generates new samples by uniformly
perturbing the PCA coeﬃcients within the ranges bounded by the original geometries,
AAA∗ =AAAmean +
z∑
j=1
˜α∗
j
√
λjWWWj, (8)
9
--- PAGE 10 ---
where ˜α∗˜α∗˜α∗ = [˜α∗
1,··· , ˜α∗
z]T is a randomly generated vector, and each dimension ˜α∗
j is sampled
from a uniform distribution U
[
min (αi
j|n
i=1), max (αi
j|n
i=1)
]
. Figure 3 plots a few generated
samples within the 2-D latent space deﬁned by its ﬁrst (PC1) and second (PC2) primary
components and the corresponding synthetic geometries. The synthetic geometries (blue)
are scattered within the triangular region bounded by three original geometries (orange).
2.2. Automatic CFD simulation routine
To systematically generate massive CFD simulation data, we develop a python routine
to automate tedious simulation procedures, including geometry pre-processing, meshing,
boundary setting, simulation, and post-processing. As the ﬁrst step, pre-processing of the
aorta geometries is needed in order to be suitable for CFD simulations. First, since the
edges at the entry and the exit of the raw aorta channel could be jaggy, the entry is slightly
extended to construct a circular rim at the inlet. Similarly, the exit of the aorta is also
extended, which also avoids inverse ﬂows at the outlet. Second, the aorta surface is smoothed
to reduce bumpiness while still preserving its geometric characteristics. Third, caps are added
to seal nonphysical holes on the aorta geometry. Once the geometries pre-processing is done,
3-D unstructured triangular meshes are generated accordingly and then converted into msh
format suitable for subsequent CFD simulations. These operations are implemented based on
the Vascular Modeling Toolkit (VMTK), which is an open-source module specialized in 3D
reconstruction, geometric analysis and mesh generation. A python wrapper is implemented
to automate the entire procedure in parallel for the ensemble setting.
Subsequently, a large-size ensemble of CFD simulations are performed to obtain the
corresponding FOIs for each sample of the generated dataset, based on the open-source
CFD platform, OpenFOAM. As handling a massive set of cases can easily be cumbersome
and time-consuming, a python subroutine coupled with OpenFOAM is established, such that
the procedure of each simulation, including meshing, setting up cases, specifying boundary
conditions, solving, and post-processing, is automatically executed and repeated through
all samples in the dataset. This process can be conducted in parallel as well. During the
post-processing step, the simulated ﬁeld data on CFD meshes are projected onto the surface
10
--- PAGE 11 ---
or volumetric mesh grids where the correspondences are established. In particular, surface
pressure and wall shear stress are projected onto surface vertices and velocity data are
projected onto the volumetric nodes via the nearest-neighbor interpolation. The volumetric
nodes are obtained by uniformly sampling points between the centerline and the surface
vertices. Finally, a large number of input geometries and corresponding ﬂow solutions are
obtained as the labeled dataset for surrogate modeling.
2.3. ML-based surrogate model
In order to build a fast forward map from the geometric space to the solution space of
interest, we propose a supervised deep learning solution based on PCA encoding-decoding
and fully-connected deep neural networks.
2.3.1. Encoding-decoding formulation.
Considering the signiﬁcantly high dimensions of 3-D shapes and solution ﬁelds in their
discrete mesh forms, we adopt an encoding-decoding strategy to reduce the learning complex-
ity. Speciﬁcally, the input geometries and output hemodynamic solution ﬁelds are encoded
into low-dimensional latent spaces. To promote training eﬃciency, the encoder-decoder con-
struction is decoupled with DNN-based surrogate training, and PCA (or POD) instead of
DNN-based autoencoder is used for the encoding-decoding process. To balance the recon-
struction accuracy and learning complexity, 100% of the PCA total variation is preserved
for the input geometries, and over 95% is preserved for all output solution ﬁelds, resulting in
reconstruction errors less than 1%. The relationship between the encoded shape and solution
ﬁelds is learned by a multilayer perceptron (MLP), where Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (Relu) is
used as the activation function.
2.3.2. Learning architecture optimization.
The DNN-based forward map is learned from the labeled dataset using the Adam opti-
mizer, where the learning rate is adaptively changed based on the estimates of the moments.
To achieve the best learning performance, we optimize the MLP architecture and other
learning hyperparameters, including the number of layers, the number of neurons of each
11
--- PAGE 12 ---
layer, batch size, and initial learning rate, using a Bayesian optimization algorithm. Specif-
ically, RAY-tune [41], an open-source python module for scalable hyperparameter tuning, is
adopted here to achieve this goal. The general idea is to construct a posterior distribution of
functions based on Gaussian processes within the prescribed ranges of the hyperparameters
to be optimized. During the optimization, the posterior of hyperparameters will be updated
given more and more training data, leading to the best learning conﬁguration. The Bayesian
optimization is superior to a brutal grid search method and can reach the optimized state in
fewer iterations. During the optimization, the Asynchronous Successive Halving Algorithm
(ASHA) is utilized to aggressively terminate non-ideal trials in advance in the interest of
saving time, and more details can be found in [42].
2.3.3. Evaluation of performance
To evaluate the performance of the ML-based surrogate model, relative mean square error
(RMSE) is used to calculate the diﬀerence between prediction and label, which is deﬁned as,
RMSE =
∑N
i (xi−yi)2
∑N
i yi2
× 100%, (9)
whereXXX = (x1,...,x N) andYYY = (y1,...,y N) are predictions and labels of FOI onN vertices/-
grids, respectively. For scalar ﬁelds such as pressure, RMSE is calculated directly upon the
pressure ﬁeld. For vector ﬁelds like wall shear stress and velocity, an array ﬂattened from
the N× 3 vector-matrix containing three directional components (x,y and z-direction) and
the array of the vector magnitude are calculated to estimate the RMSE, referred to as vector
RMSE and magnitude RMSE, respectively. When the error is evaluated upon a test dataset
with multiple samples, the average of the RMSE of each sample is calculated.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Statistical shape analysis and synthesis
We ﬁrst register the eight original patient-speciﬁc aorta geometries by solving seven dif-
feomorphisms from a randomly chosen template to the rest of seven geometries. An example
12
--- PAGE 13 ---
of such diﬀeomorphism is demonstrated in Figure 3. The template A1 is ﬁrstly sampled with
4000 points P1 and so is the target geometry A2 with P2. The shape deformation A(τ) is
solved with the boundary condition of A(τ = 0) = P1 and A(τ = 1) = P2. Several interme-
diate states of the function A are shown in the middle, among which the point clouds near
the left side resemble P1 and, likewise, point clouds near the right side resemble P2. In ad-
dition, the intermediate states can be used to “interpolate” between 3-D irregular, showing
geometric morphing from aorta A1 to aorta A2.
intermediate aorta
A1 A2
P1 P2
② ② ② ②
① ③ ③③ ①
Figure 3: Building correspondence: Step 1○, sample vertices from surface; Step 2○, solve
the diﬀeomorphism function; Step 3○, reconstruct intermediate aorta
Based on the set of eight original aorta geometries, a large number of virtual aortas
are synthesized by sampling the geometric space spanned by the original shapes. Both the
uniform PCA sampling and random interpolation methods are implemented, and the sample
distributions of them are plotted in Figure 4 to compare their coverage of the input space.
The 1,000 synthetic shapes are scattered in the coordinate plane of their PCA latent space
with the ﬁrst (PC1) and second (PC2) primary components. The synthetic samples obtained
by the uniform PCA sampling are much more spread out over the coordinate plane than those
from the random interpolation method, indicating a better coverage of the input space and
13
--- PAGE 14 ---
400
 200
 0 200 400
PC1
200
100
0
100
200
PC2
(a) Uniform PCA sampling
400
 200
 0 200 400
PC1
200
100
0
100
200
PC2
synthetic
original (b) Random interpolation sampling
Figure 4: Latent space distribution of synthetic ( ) and original ( ) samples for diﬀerent
synthesizing method: (a) uniform PCA sampling, (b) random interpolation sampling
hence adopted for the data generation in this work. Part of the synthetic geometries and the
eight original geometries are shown in Figure 5. The uniform sampling method successfully
explores the input topological space and the synthetic geometries, though virtual, possess
geometric characteristics of biological shapes of real aortas and fully displays the variation
of the aorta shapes.
3.2. Surrogate CFD modeling using deep learning
Once the aorta geometry dataset is built, ensemble CFD simulations are conducted to
generate labeled hemodynamics data, which will be used to train an ML-based surrogate.
Numerical setup. In this work, we made the following assumptions: 1) the blood ﬂow is
Newtonian and governed by the steady-state incompressible Navier-Stokes equations; 2) the
vessel walls are rigid; 3) the inlet velocity has a parabolic proﬁle with a maximum magnitude
of 1 m/s, which is close to the peak blood ﬂow velocity during one cardiac cycle in a human
body. A zero-gradient boundary condition is applied at the inlet for pressure and a constant
reference pressure is set at the outlet. The OpenFOAM, an open-source C++ library for
FVM, is used for CFD simulations. In particular, the Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure
Linked Equations (SIMPLE) algorithms [43] were used for solving the incompressible Navier-
Stokes equations, and the Rhie and Chow interpolation with collocated grids was employed
14
--- PAGE 15 ---
400
 200
 0 200 400
PC1
200
100
0
100
200
PC2
synthetic
original
Figure 5: Latent space distribution (top) and visualization (bottom) of synthetic ( ) and
original ( ) aorta samples
to prevent the pressure–velocity decoupling [44]. All CFD simulations were run in parallel
(4 CPUs per case), and each simulation takes around 1 .2× 103 s to reach the convergence.
Three decoupled MLPs are constructed to predict the velocity, surface pressure, and WSS
ﬁelds separately. The network architectures and learning parameters are optimized using
RAY-tune module, which is given in Table A.2. The DNNs are trained on an Nvidia RTX
A6000 GPU with a minimum of 2,000 epochs to ensure convergence.
Learning performance study. As a demonstration, we generated a dataset of Ntot =
1, 000 aorta geometries and CFD simulated labels for training and validation study. The
dataset is divided into a training set and testing set with the ratio of r = Ntrain/(Ntrain +
Ntest), where Ntrain and Ntest denote the size of training set and test set, respectively. The
learning-prediction performance of the trained DNN surrogates with diﬀerent training-testing
ratios are reported in Table 1, where the averaged MSEs of the DNN-predicted surface pres-
15
--- PAGE 16 ---
sure, velocity, and WSS ﬁelds are compared. Considering the randomness of the DNN
initialization, the training processes for all DNNs are repeated by ten times with diﬀerent
random initializations, and the averaged prediction errors over these trials are reported for
a more rigorous assessment. It can be seen that the relative errors of the NN surrogate
r = Ntrain
Ntrain+Ntest
ϵP ϵV ϵVM ϵWSS ϵWSSM
r=60% 1.83% 0.735% 0.504% 1.88% 1.33%
r=70% 1.81% 0.726% 0.5% 1.86% 1.31%
r=80% 1.67% 0.734% 0.505% 1.86% 1.32%
r=90% 1.48% 0.64% 0.434% 1.74% 1.26%
Table 1: DNN prediction errors (averaged MSE) with diﬀerent training to testing size
ratios for hemodynamics ﬁelds of interest, including surface pressure ( ϵP ), velocity vector
(ϵV ), velocity magnitude (ϵVM ), wall shear stress (ϵW ), wall shear stress magnitude (ϵWM ).
prediction are very low once the DNNs are suﬃciently trained. For velocity ﬁeld prediction,
the prediction error is less than 1% even only 60% of the dataset is used for training. Com-
pared to the velocity, the errors of surface ﬁeld predictions such as surface pressure and WSS
ﬁelds are slightly higher, since they are more sensitive to the shape of vessel walls and the
boundary layer conditions, which are not easy to capture well. Also, for vector-valued ﬂuid
quantities like velocity and WSS, the magnitude errors are smaller than the vector errors by
about 30%. Viewing the columns for each ﬂow quantity, the prediction accuracy increases
as the training size grows, which is as expected. For example, the pressure error climbs from
1.48% at r = 90% to 1.83% at r = 60% as r grows. In general, the prediction of the FOIs is
accurate, indicating the great capability of the proposed DNN-based surrogate model.
Predicting local hemodynamic information. In contrast to traditional surrogate
model (e.g., GP models) or reduced-space model (e.g., LP/1D models), the proposed ML-
based surrogate model is able to rapidly predict local hemodynamic information such as
blood ﬂow pattern, surface pressure and WSS distributions over the vessel walls. For il-
lustration, we randomly selected four test aorta geometries, and the hemodynamic ﬁelds
16
--- PAGE 17 ---
predicted by the DNN surrogate (r = 80%) are compared with the CFD reference (referred
to as ground truth), as shown in Figures 6 and 7. Besides, the absolute error contours are
also plotted out by substracting the ground truth from the prediction. For pressures, the
surrogate model yields very close surface distribution to the ground truth, yet slight diﬀer-
ences exist at the stenosis of the descending aorta. From the error contours, this discrepancy
is very mild on samples 1, 2 and 5, but notable on sample 3, where the severity of stenosis
is much higher than other samples. This indicates that the surrogate model is slightly less
accurate in capturing ﬂow features with large pressure gradients, since more ﬂow vortices
are induced by sharp changes of surface curvatures complicating the ﬂow physics. Surrogate
prediction of the WSS distribution is in a good agreement with the ground truth. The pat-
tern and low/high WSS regions can be accurately captured. However, the surrogate model
tends to smooth out the small WSS ﬂuctuations compared to the CFD reference. It appears
that high-frequency components of the output are partially trimmed oﬀ when interpolating
among neighboring training samples based on the non-linear relations learned by the neural
network. Similar to pressure, notable inconsistency is also observed near the stenosis on
the descending aorta for sample 3. The velocity contours on the cross-section and internal
velocity vector ﬁelds are visualized in Figure 7. Again, the predicted velocity cross-section
contours agree with the CFD ground truth very well and the overall velocity vector ﬁelds
from the neural network and CFD are almost identical for all samples, though the error
contours of planar velocity show slight prediction errors near the stenosis region for Sample
3.
17
--- PAGE 18 ---
Figure 6: ML surrogate predictions of pressure (top) and wall shear stress (bottom) are
compared with the CFD ground truth: prediction (1st and 4th row), CFD ground truth
(2nd and 5th row), prediction error (3rd and 6th row)
18
--- PAGE 19 ---
Figure 7: Cross-section velocity magnitude (top) and velocity vector ﬁled (bottom) com-
parison of prediction and CFD ground truth: prediction (1st and 4th row), ground truth
(2nd and 5th row), error (3rd row)
Training cost and prediction speedup. The mappings between shape input and FOIs,
including pressure, velocity and WSS, are learned using separated neural networks, and each
takes about two minutes to be fully trained on an Nvidia RTX-3090 GPU. The network
inference for solution ﬁeld prediction takes less than 0.0012 seconds. In contrast, a full-
19
--- PAGE 20 ---
resolution CFD simulation needs about 20 minutes to reach the steady state, not counting
the overhead for mesh generation and case setup, which could also be time-consuming. As
a result, the fully trained DNN surrogate model has 100 , 000x speedup over the full CFD
simulation in the online inference phase. We should note that a fair comparison should also
consider the oﬄine cost of constructing the surrogate, which includes the cost for network
training and label generation. As for network training, the cost is negligible compared to
that of a CFD simulation, thanks to the light DNN structure deﬁned in the latent space.
However, the cost for data generation depends on the number of training labels required,
which is determined by the desired trade-oﬀ between the eﬃciency and accuracy of the sur-
rogate. For example, supposing 500 CFD labels are used for network training, the CFD data
generation cost is 500× 20 minutes, which is signiﬁcantly greater than that of a single CFD
simulation. Nonetheless, the surrogate model is built for many-query applications (e.g., opti-
mization, uncertainty quantiﬁcation, inverse modeling, etc.), and the huge speedup of single
model evaluation can be leveraged when a large number of model evaluations are required
as the oﬄine cost is paid oﬀ at once. For example, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), as
the gold standard Bayesian inference method for forward and inverse UQ, usually requires
hundreds of thousands of model evaluations to reach convergence, which well justiﬁes the
data generation at the cost of hundreds of full-order CFD evaluations. Moreover, it is worth
noting that the training dataset size is application-dependent and the data generation cost
can be signiﬁcantly reduced if one allocates the computational budget wisely. A compre-
hensive study on the use of the proposed surrogate model in speciﬁc UQ or optimization
applications is out of the scope of this work and will be conducted in the future.
3.3. Comparison of DNN-based and bi-ﬁdelity surrogate models
Lastly, we investigate how well the proposed DNN-based surrogate model performs com-
pared to other state-of-art surrogate models that can provide full-ﬁeld hemodynamic pre-
dictions. To enable the full-ﬁeld prediction capability with the same resolution as that of
full-order CFD simulations, a multi-ﬁdelity strategy is often adopted for surrogate modeling.
The multi-ﬁdelity paradigm is pioneered by Kennedy & O’Hagan [45] decades ago, origi-
20
--- PAGE 21 ---
nally from a statistical point of view (e.g., GP-based multi-model approach). Very recently,
multi-ﬁdelity strategy has been applied for surrogate modeling in inference and uncertainty
quantiﬁcation (UQ) problems in cardiovascular biomechanics problems [14, 15, 46–48]. In
particular, Gao et al. [14] developed a bi-ﬁdelity (BF) surrogate modeling approach for 3-D
patient-speciﬁc hemodynamic simulations, which has been demonstrated eﬀective for both
forward and inverse UQ problems [14, 15]. The theoretical backbone of the BF surrogate
is based on the multi-ﬁdelity paradigm, which leverages the accuracy of high-ﬁdelity CFD
solutions and the eﬃciency of low-ﬁdelity CFD solutions, largely reducing the total compu-
tation cost compared with conventional full-order CFD simulations. Here we compared the
proposed DNN-based surrogate with the state-of-the-art BF surrogate model, which are built
with the same amount of training labels. It is worth noting that the training overhead and
prediction cost of the BF surrogate are always higher than those of the DNN-based surrogate
with the same amount of training data (i.e., high-ﬁdelity CFD labels), because low-ﬁdelity
CFD simulations have to be performed for both training and inference. Speciﬁcally, to build
the BF surrogate model, in addition to high-ﬁdelity (HF) CFD training data, another 1,000
low-ﬁdelity (LF) CFD simulations are conducted on low-resolution meshes. As the low-res
meshes are very coarse and the convergence criterion is set to be large, the LF simulation
cost is much lower than that of a HF simulation. The LF data are used to explore the input
geometric space to determine important points, where HF CFD simulations are performed
for training. More details of the BF surrogate construction can be found in [14].
To ﬁnd out how the prediction errors change with the training size, the training set size
(TS) changes from 300 to 900, and the testing set is a ﬁxed group of 100 aortas randomly
generated. The comparison of performance is shown in Figure 8. Both surrogate models have
reasonably good predictions, but the proposed DNN-based surrogate model outperforms the
BF surrogate model for all FOIs under all diﬀerent training scenarios. Both surrogate models
reach their best accuracy at TS = 900 for all FOIs. The prediction error of the BF model
quickly increases as the training sample size decreases, while this trend is less notable for the
DNN-based model, particularly for velocity and WSS predictions, indicating a more robust
21
--- PAGE 22 ---
300 600 900
TS
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%AMSE
NN
BF
(a) Pressure
300 600 900
TS
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%AMSE
NN
BF (b) Velocity
300 600 900
TS
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%AMSE
NN
BF (c) Wall shear stress
Figure 8: Comparison of neural network(NN) and bi-ﬁdelity model(BF): Y axis, averaged
mean square error (AMSE); X axis, trainset size (TS)
behavior in the small data regime. For both models, the learning performance for the 3-D
velocity vector ﬁeld is slightly better than that of surface ﬁeld outputs, such as pressure
and WSS, due to the fact that they are more sensitive to the local changes of the input
geometries cross diﬀerence patients. Moreover, the BF prediction cost is higher than the
DNN-based surrogate, since each BF prediction requires an LF CFD simulation. Therefore,
the proposed DNN-based surrogate model is superior to the BF model in terms of accuracy
and eﬃciency, though both models can predict all FOIs reasonably well.
4. Conclusion
In this study, we developed a statistical shape modeling (SSM) approach to parameterize
the geometric space spanned by a set of 3-D patient aorta geometries and systematically syn-
thesize a large number of virtual aorta geometries. The results show that the proposed SSM
method successfully established correspondence among aorta geometries from diﬀerent pa-
tients and the uniform PCA sampling algorithm suﬃciently explored the input space, gener-
ating abundant synthetic aorta shapes that fully cover the geometric variation. Subsequently,
an ML-based surrogate model is proposed to predict comprehensive local hemodynamic in-
formation (e.g., surface pressure, velocity and WSS ﬁelds), where an encoding-decoding
structure is built based on PCA and multiple MLPs are constructed to learn the non-linear
mappings between the input geometries and ﬂow ﬁelds of interest within the latent spaces.
22
--- PAGE 23 ---
The PCA encoder and decoders managed to reduce the dimension of the mesh-based 3-D
aorta shapes and ﬁeld outputs to a large extent and maintained a reconstruction error as low
as 1%. The MLPs are well optimized in terms of their hyperparameters and trained on diﬀer-
ent sizes of sample sets. The testing results prove that the proposed surrogate model is able
to yield hemodynamic ﬁeld predictions in a good agreement with the ground truth obtained
from full-order CFD simulations, yet the accuracy is slightly lower near the stenosis of the
descending aorta, where ﬂow features are more complicated due to sharp pressure gradients.
The accuracy of the proposed model can be improved by increasing the size of training set.
The proposed DNN-based surrogate is compared with the state-of-the-art bi-ﬁdelity (BF)
surrogate model, and the DNN surrogate outperforms the BF surrogate in terms of both
eﬃciency and accuracy for all FOIs under diﬀerent training scenarios. Furthermore, the pro-
posed model exhibits a robust behavior when the number of samples drops whereas the BF
model easily loses its accuracy, especially for surface pressure predictions. In conclusion, the
proposed DNN-based surrogate model shows a great capability of approximating the non-
linearity of the CFD simulations for cardiovascular ﬂows. Considering extremely low costs
of DNN for inference, the trained DNN-based surrogate is able to provide high-resolution
local hemodynamic information in split of second, showing a great potential for applications
requires massive model queries, such model inference, optimization, and uncertainty quan-
tiﬁcation problems. Although the current work focus on aortic ﬂows, the proposed methods
can be applied to hemodynamic modeling for other anatomies in general.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the funds from National Science Foundation under
award numbers CMMI-1934300 and OAC-2047127, and startup funds from the College of
Engineering at University of Notre Dame in supporting this study.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
23
--- PAGE 24 ---
Appendix A. Optimized MLP structures and hyperparameters
FOIFOIFOI DNN LayersDNN LayersDNN Layers In & Out featuresIn & Out featuresIn & Out features batch sizebatch sizebatch size learning ratelearning ratelearning rate
Linear Layer (7,64)
Relu -
Linear Layer (64,8)
Pressure Relu - 8 1 × 10−3
Linear Layer (8,256)
Relu -
Linear Layer (265,10)
Linear Layer (7,64)
Relu -
Linear Layer (64,512)
Velocity Relu - 8 4 .07× 10−4
Linear Layer (512,256)
Relu -
Linear Layer (265,10)
Linear Layer (7,512)
Relu -
Linear Layer (512,16)
Relu -
Linear Layer (16,512)
Relu -
WSS Linear Layer (512,32) 8 2 .30× 10−4
Relu -
Linear Layer (32,16)
Relu -
Linear Layer (16,256)
Relu -
Linear Layer (256,10)
Table A.2: The optimized MLP structure and hyperparameters based on Bayesian tuning
References
[1] D. Mozaﬀarian, E. J. Benjamin, A. S. Go, D. K. Arnett, M. J. Blaha, M. Cushman,
S. De Ferranti, J.-P. Despr´ es, H. J. Fullerton, V. J. Howard, et al., Executive summary:
24
--- PAGE 25 ---
heart disease and stroke statistics—2015 update: a report from the american heart
association, Circulation 131 (4) (2015) 434–441.
[2] K. S. Nayak, J.-F. Nielsen, M. A. Bernstein, M. Markl, P. D. Gatehouse, R. M. Botnar,
D. Saloner, C. Lorenz, H. Wen, B. S. Hu, et al., Cardiovascular magnetic resonance
phase contrast imaging, Journal of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance 17 (1) (2015)
1–26.
[3] C. A. Taylor, C. Figueroa, Patient-speciﬁc modeling of cardiovascular mechanics, An-
nual review of biomedical engineering 11 (2009) 109–134.
[4] D. A. Steinman, C. A. Taylor, Flow imaging and computing: large artery hemodynam-
ics, Annals of biomedical engineering 33 (12) (2005) 1704–1709.
[5] J. Xiang, L. Antiga, N. Varble, K. V. Snyder, E. I. Levy, A. H. Siddiqui, H. Meng, Aview:
an image-based clinical computational tool for intracranial aneurysm ﬂow visualization
and clinical management, Annals of biomedical engineering 44 (4) (2016) 1085–1096.
[6] A. Quarteroni, A. Manzoni, C. Vergara, The cardiovascular system: mathematical mod-
elling, numerical algorithms and clinical applications, Acta Numerica 26 (2017) 365–590.
[7] C. A. Taylor, T. A. Fonte, J. K. Min, Computational ﬂuid dynamics applied to cardiac
computed tomography for noninvasive quantiﬁcation of fractional ﬂow reserve: scientiﬁc
basis, Journal of the American College of Cardiology 61 (22) (2013) 2233–2241.
[8] K. M. Chinnaiyan, T. Akasaka, T. Amano, J. J. Bax, P. Blanke, B. De Bruyne,
T. Kawasaki, J. Leipsic, H. Matsuo, Y. Morino, et al., Rationale, design and goals of
the heartﬂow assessing diagnostic value of non-invasive ﬀrct in coronary care (advance)
registry, Journal of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography 11 (1) (2017) 62–67.
[9] T. W. Hokken, J. M. Ribeiro, P. P. De Jaegere, N. M. Van Mieghem, Precision medicine
in interventional cardiology, Interventional Cardiology Review 15 (2020).
25
--- PAGE 26 ---
[10] S. Sankaran, A. L. Marsden, A stochastic collocation method for uncertainty quantiﬁca-
tion and propagation in cardiovascular simulations, Journal of biomechanical engineer-
ing 133 (3) (2011).
[11] S. Sankaran, A. L. Marsden, The impact of uncertainty on shape optimization of ideal-
ized bypass graft models in unsteady ﬂow, Physics of ﬂuids 22 (12) (2010) 121902.
[12] J. S. Tran, D. E. Schiavazzi, A. B. Ramachandra, A. M. Kahn, A. L. Marsden, Auto-
mated tuning for parameter identiﬁcation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation in multi-scale
coronary simulations, Computers & ﬂuids 142 (2017) 128–138.
[13] D. Schiavazzi, A. Doostan, G. Iaccarino, A. Marsden, A generalized multi-resolution ex-
pansion for uncertainty propagation with application to cardiovascular modeling, Com-
puter methods in applied mechanics and engineering 314 (2017) 196–221.
[14] H. Gao, J.-X. Wang, A bi-ﬁdelity ensemble kalman method for PDE-constrained inverse
problems in computational mechanics, Computational Mechanics 67 (4) (2021) 1115–
1131.
[15] H. Gao, X. Zhu, J.-X. Wang, A bi-ﬁdelity surrogate modeling approach for uncertainty
propagation in three-dimensional hemodynamic simulations, Computer Methods in Ap-
plied Mechanics and Engineering 366 (2020) 113047.
[16] M. Mirramezani, S. L. Diamond, H. I. Litt, S. C. Shadden, Reduced order models for
transstenotic pressure drop in the coronary arteries, Journal of biomechanical engineer-
ing 141 (3) (2019) 031005.
[17] M. Mirramezani, S. C. Shadden, A distributed lumped parameter model of blood ﬂow,
Annals of Biomedical Engineering 48 (12) (2020) 2870–2886.
[18] M. R. Pfaller, J. Pham, A. Verma, N. M. Wilson, D. W. Parker, W. Yang, A. L.
Marsden, Automated generation of 0d and 1d reduced-order models of patient-speciﬁc
blood ﬂow, arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.04878 (2021).
26
--- PAGE 27 ---
[19] A. Manzoni, A. Quarteroni, G. Rozza, Model reduction techniques for fast blood ﬂow
simulation in parametrized geometries, International journal for numerical methods in
biomedical engineering 28 (6-7) (2012) 604–625.
[20] T. Lassila, A. Manzoni, A. Quarteroni, G. Rozza, A reduced computational and ge-
ometrical framework for inverse problems in hemodynamics, International journal for
numerical methods in biomedical engineering 29 (7) (2013) 741–776.
[21] F. Ballarin, G. Rozza, Pod–galerkin monolithic reduced order models for parametrized
ﬂuid-structure interaction problems, International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Fluids 82 (12) (2016) 1010–1034.
[22] F. Ballarin, E. Faggiano, S. Ippolito, A. Manzoni, A. Quarteroni, G. Rozza, R. Scrofani,
Fast simulations of patient-speciﬁc haemodynamics of coronary artery bypass grafts
based on a pod–galerkin method and a vascular shape parametrization, Journal of
Computational Physics 315 (2016) 609–628.
[23] T. Lassila, A. Manzoni, A. Quarteroni, G. Rozza, Model order reduction in ﬂuid dy-
namics: challenges and perspectives, Reduced Order Methods for modeling and com-
putational reduction (2014) 235–273.
[24] S. Chaturantabut, D. C. Sorensen, Nonlinear model reduction via discrete empirical
interpolation, SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 32 (5) (2010) 2737–2764.
[25] H. Gao, J.-X. Wang, M. J. Zahr, Non-intrusive model reduction of large-scale, nonlinear
dynamical systems using deep learning, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 412 (2020)
132614.
[26] F. Scarselli, A. C. Tsoi, Universal approximation using feedforward neural networks: A
survey of some existing methods, and some new results, Neural networks 11 (1) (1998)
15–37.
27
--- PAGE 28 ---
[27] M. Hutzenthaler, A. Jentzen, T. Kruse, T. Anh Nguyen, P. von Wurstemberger,
Overcoming the curse of dimensionality in the numerical approximation of semilinear
parabolic partial diﬀerential equations, Proceedings of the Royal Society A 476 (2244)
(2020) 20190630.
[28] L. Liang, M. Liu, C. Martin, J. A. Elefteriades, W. Sun, A machine learning approach
to investigate the relationship between shape features and numerically predicted risk
of ascending aortic aneurysm, Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobiology 16 (5)
(2017) 1519–1533.
[29] L. Liang, M. Liu, C. Martin, W. Sun, A deep learning approach to estimate stress
distribution: a fast and accurate surrogate of ﬁnite-element analysis, Journal of The
Royal Society Interface 15 (138) (2018) 20170844.
[30] A. Madani, A. Bakhaty, J. Kim, Y. Mubarak, M. R. Mofrad, Bridging ﬁnite element
and machine learning modeling: stress prediction of arterial walls in atherosclerosis,
Journal of biomechanical engineering 141 (8) (2019).
[31] A. Balu, S. Nallagonda, F. Xu, A. Krishnamurthy, M.-C. Hsu, S. Sarkar, A deep learn-
ing framework for design and analysis of surgical bioprosthetic heart valves, Scientiﬁc
reports 9 (1) (2019) 1–12.
[32] F. Sahli Costabal, Y. Yang, P. Perdikaris, D. E. Hurtado, E. Kuhl, Physics-informed
neural networks for cardiac activation mapping, Frontiers in Physics 8 (2020) 42.
[33] G. Kissas, Y. Yang, E. Hwuang, W. R. Witschey, J. A. Detre, P. Perdikaris, Machine
learning in cardiovascular ﬂows modeling: Predicting arterial blood pressure from non-
invasive 4d ﬂow mri data using physics-informed neural networks, Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 358 (2020) 112623.
[34] L. Liang, W. Mao, W. Sun, A feasibility study of deep learning for predicting hemody-
namics of human thoracic aorta, Journal of biomechanics 99 (2020) 109544.
28
--- PAGE 29 ---
[35] G. Li, H. Wang, M. Zhang, S. Tupin, A. Qiao, Y. Liu, M. Ohta, H. Anzai, Prediction
of 3d cardiovascular hemodynamics before and after coronary artery bypass surgery via
deep learning, Communications biology 4 (1) (2021) 1–12.
[36] J. Br¨ uning, F. Hellmeier, P. Yevtushenko, T. K¨ uhne, L. Goubergrits, Uncertainty quan-
tiﬁcation for non-invasive assessment of pressure drop across a coarctation of the aorta
using cfd, Cardiovascular engineering and technology 9 (4) (2018) 582–596.
[37] S. Valette, J. Chassery, Approximated centroidal voronoi diagrams for uniform polygo-
nal mesh coarsening, Computer Graphics Forum 23 (3) (2004) 381–389.
[38] S. Bouaziz, A. Tagliasacchi, M. Pauly, Sparse iterative closest point, in: Computer
graphics forum, Vol. 32, Wiley Online Library, 2013, pp. 113–123.
[39] M. F. Beg, M. I. Miller, A. Trouv´ e, L. Younes, Computing large deformation metric
mappings via geodesic ﬂows of diﬀeomorphisms, International journal of computer vision
61 (2) (2005) 139–157.
[40] S. Durrleman, M. Prastawa, N. Charon, J. R. Korenberg, S. Joshi, G. Gerig, A. Trouv´ e,
Morphometry of anatomical shape complexes with dense deformations and sparse pa-
rameters, NeuroImage 101 (2014) 35–49.
[41] R. Liaw, E. Liang, R. Nishihara, P. Moritz, J. E. Gonzalez, I. Stoica, Tune: A research
platform for distributed model selection and training, arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.05118
(2018).
[42] L. Li, et al., A system for massively parallel hyperparameter tuning, Proceedings of
Machine Learning and Systems 2 (2020) 230–246.
[43] R. H. Pletcher, J. C. Tannehill, D. Anderson, Computational ﬂuid mechanics and heat
transfer, CRC press, 2012.
[44] C. M. Rhie, W.-L. Chow, Numerical study of the turbulent ﬂow past an airfoil with
trailing edge separation, AIAA journal 21 (11) (1983) 1525–1532.
29
--- PAGE 30 ---
[45] A. O. M. C. Kennedy, Bayesian calibration of computer models, Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) (63) (2001) 425–464.
[46] J. Biehler, M. W. Gee, W. A. Wall, Towards eﬃcient uncertainty quantiﬁcation in com-
plex and large-scale biomechanical problems based on a bayesian multi-ﬁdelity scheme,
Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobiology 14 (3) (2015) 489–513.
[47] J. Biehler, S. Kehl, M. W. Gee, F. Schmies, J. Pelisek, A. Maier, C. Reeps, H.-H. Eck-
stein, W. A. Wall, Probabilistic noninvasive prediction of wall properties of abdominal
aortic aneurysms using bayesian regression, Biomechanics and modeling in mechanobi-
ology 16 (1) (2017) 45–61.
[48] C. M. Fleeter, G. Geraci, D. E. Schiavazzi, A. M. Kahn, A. L. Marsden, Multilevel
and multiﬁdelity uncertainty quantiﬁcation for cardiovascular hemodynamics, Com-
puter methods in applied mechanics and engineering 365 (2020) 113030.
30